 Eleanor Roosevelt -- "The Struggle for Human Rights"
Eleanor Roosevelt
delivered 28 September 1948, Paris, France
I have come this evening to talk with you on one of the greatestissues of our time -- that is the preservation of human freedom. I have chosen to discussit here in France, at the Sorbonne, because here in this soil the roots of human freedomhave long ago struck deep and here they have been richly nourished. It was here theDeclaration of the Rights of Man was proclaimed, and the great slogans of the FrenchRevolution -- liberty, equality, fraternity -- fired the imagination of men. I have chosento discuss this issue in Europe because this has been the scene of the greatest historicbattles between freedom and tyranny. I have chosen to discuss it in the early days of theGeneral Assembly because the issue of human liberty is decisive for the settlement ofoutstanding political differences and for the future of the United Nations. The decisive importance of this issue was fully recognized by thefounders of the United Nations at San Francisco. Concern for the preservation andpromotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms stands at the heart of the UnitedNations. Its Charter is distinguished by its preoccupation with the rights and welfare ofindividual men and women. The United Nations has made it clear that it intends to upholdhuman rights and to protect the dignity of the human personality. In the preamble to theCharter the keynote is set when it declares: "We the people of the United Nationsdetermined...to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth ofthe human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,and...to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom."This reflects the basic premise of the Charter that the peace and security of mankind aredependent on mutual respect for the rights and freedoms of all. One of the purposes of the United Nations is declared in article 1to be: "to achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of aneconomic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouragingrespect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as torace, sex, language, or religion." This thought is repeated at several points and notably in articles55 and 56 the Members pledge themselves to take joint and separate action in cooperationwith the United Nations for the promotion of "universal respect for, and observanceof, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,language, or religion." The Human Rights Commission was given as its first and mostimportant task the preparation of an International Bill of Rights. The General Assembly,which opened its third session here in Paris a few days ago, will have before it the firstfruit of the Commission's labors in this task, that is the International Declaration ofHuman Rights. The Declaration was finally completed after much work during thelast session of the Human Rights Commission in New York in the spring of 1948. TheEconomic and Social Council has sent it without recommendation to the General Assembly,together with other documents transmitted by the Human Rights Commission. It was decided in our Commission that a Bill of Rights shouldcontain two parts: 1. A Declaration which could be approved through action of theMember States of the United Nations in the General Assembly. This declaration would havegreat moral force, and would say to the peoples of the world "this is what we hopehuman rights may mean to all people in the years to come." We have put down here therights that we consider basic for individual human beings the world over to have. Withoutthem, we feel that the full development of individual personality is impossible. 2. The second part of the bill, which the Human Rights Commissionhas not yet completed because of the lack of time, is a covenant which would be in theform of a treaty to be presented to the nations of the world. Each nation, as it isprepared to do so, would ratify this covenant and the covenant would then become bindingon the nations which adhere to it. Each nation ratifying would then be obligated to changeits laws wherever they did not conform to the points contained in the covenant. This covenant, of course, would have to be a simpler document. Itcould not state aspirations, which we feel to be permissible in the Declaration. It couldonly state rights which could be assured by law and it must contain methods ofimplementation, and no state ratifying the covenant could be allowed to disregard it. Themethods of implementation have not yet been agreed upon, nor have they been given adequateconsideration by the Commission at any of its meetings. There certainly should bediscussion on the entire question of this world Bill of Human Rights and there may beacceptance by this Assembly of the Declaration if they come to agreement on it. Theacceptance of the Declaration, I think, should encourage every nation in the coming monthsto discuss its meaning with its people so that they will be better prepared to accept thecovenant with a deeper understanding of the problems involved when that is presented, wehope, a year from now and, we hope, accepted. The Declaration has come from the Human Rights Commission withunanimous acceptance except for four abstentions -- the U.S.S.R., Yugoslavia, Ukraine, andByelorussia. The reason for this is a fundamental difference in the conception of humanrights as they exist in these states and in certain other Member States in the UnitedNations. In the discussion before the Assembly, I think it should be madecrystal clear what these differences are and tonight I want to spend a little time makingthem clear to you. It seems to me there is a valid reason for taking the time today tothink carefully and clearly on the subject of human rights, because in the acceptance andobservance of these rights lies the root, I believe, of our chance of peace in the future,and for the strengthening of the United Nations organization to the point where it canmaintain peace in the future. We must not be confused about what freedom is. Basic human rightsare simple and easily understood: freedom of speech and a free press; freedom of religionand worship; freedom of assembly and the right of petition; the right of men to be securein their homes and free from unreasonable search and seizure and from arbitrary arrest andpunishment. We must not be deluded by the efforts of the forces of reaction toprostitute the great words of our free tradition and thereby to confuse the struggle.Democracy, freedom, human rights have come to have a definite meaning to the people of theworld which we must not allow any nation to so change that they are made synonymous withsuppression and dictatorship. There are basic differences that show up even in the use of wordsbetween a democratic and a totalitarian country. For instance "democracy" meansone thing to the U.S.S.R. and another the U.S.A. and, I know, in France. I have servedsince the first meeting of the nuclear commission on the Human Rights Commission, and Ithink this point stands out clearly. The U.S.S.R. Representatives assert that they already have achievedmany things which we, in what they call the "bourgeois democracies" cannotachieve because their government controls the accomplishment of these things. Ourgovernment seems powerless to them because, in the last analysis, it is controlled by thepeople. They would not put it that way -- they would say that the people in the U.S.S.R.control their government by allowing their government to have certain absolute rights. We,on the other hand, feel that certain rights can never be granted to the government, butmust be kept in the hands of the people. For instance, the U.S.S.R. will assert that their press is freebecause the state makes it free by providing the machinery, the paper, and even the moneyfor salaries for the people who work on the paper. They state that there is no controlover what is printed in the various papers that they subsidize in this manner, such, forinstance, as a trade-union paper. But what would happen if a paper were to print ideaswhich were critical of the basic policies and beliefs of the Communist government.? I amsure some good reason would be found for abolishing the paper. It is true that they have been many cases where newspapers in theU.S.S.R. have criticized officials and their actions and have been responsible for theremoval of those officials, but in doing so they did not criticize anything which wasfundamental to Communist beliefs. They simply criticized methods of doing things, so onemust differentiate between things which are permissible, such as criticism of anyindividual or of the manner of doing things, and the criticism of a belief which would beconsidered vital to the acceptance of Communism. What are the differences, for instance, between trade-unions in thetotalitarian states and in the democracies? In the totalitarian state a trade-union is aninstrument used by the government to enforce duties, not to assert rights. Propagandamaterial which the government desires the workers to have is furnished by the trade-unionsto be circulated to their members. Our trade-unions, on the other hand, are solely the instrument ofthe workers themselves. They represent the workers in their relations with the governmentand with management and they are free to develop their own opinions without governmenthelp or interference. The concepts of our trade-unions and those in totalitarian countriesare drastically different. There is little mutual understanding. I think the best example one can give of this basic difference ofthe use of terms is “the right to work.” The Soviet Union insists that this is abasic right which it alone can guarantee because it alone provides full employment by thegovernment. But the right to work in the Soviet Union means the assignment of workers todo whatever task is given to them by the government without an opportunity for the peopleto participate in the decision that the government should do this. A society in whicheveryone works is not necessarily a free society and may indeed be a slave society; on theother hand, a society in which there is widespread economic insecurity can turn freedominto a barren and vapid right for millions of people. We in the United States have come to realize it means freedom tochoose one’s job, to work or not to work as one desires. We, in the United States,have come to realize, however, that people have a right to demand that their governmentwill not allow them to starve because as individuals they cannot find work of the kindthey are accustomed to doing and this is a decision brought about by public opinion whichcame as a result of the great depression in which many people were out of work, but wewould not consider in the United States that we had gained any freedom if we werecompelled to follow a dictatorial assignment to work where and when we were told. Theright of choice would seem to us an important, fundamental freedom. I have great sympathy with the Russian people. They love theircountry and have always defended it valiantly against invaders. They have been through aperiod of revolution, as a result of which they were for a time cut off from outsidecontact. They have not lost their resulting suspicion of other countries and the greatdifficulty is today that their government encourages this suspicion and seems to believethat force alone will bring them respect. We, in the democracies, believe in a kind of international respectand action which is reciprocal. We do not think others should treat us differently fromthe way they wish to be treated. It is interference in other countries that especiallystirs up antagonism against the Soviet Government. If it wishes to feel secure indeveloping its economic and political theories within its territory, then it should grantto others that same security. We believe in the freedom of people to make their ownmistakes. We do not interfere with them and they should not interfere with others. The basic problem confronting the world today, as I said in thebeginning, is the preservation of human freedom for the individual and consequently forthe society of which he is a part. We are fighting this battle again today as it wasfought at the time of the French Revolution and as the time of the American Revolution.The issue of human liberty is as decisive now as it was then. I want to give you myconception of what is meant in my country by freedom of the individual. Long ago in London during a discussion with Mr. Vyshinsky, he toldme there was no such thing as freedom for the individual in the world. All freedom of theindividual was conditioned by the rights of other individuals. That of course, I granted.I said: “We approach the question from a different point of view/ we here in theUnited Nations are trying to develop ideals which will be broader in outlook, which willconsider first the rights of man, which will consider what makes man more free; notgovernments, but man.” The totalitarian state typically places the will of the peoplesecond to decrees promulgated by a few men at the top.Naturally there must always be consideration of the rights of others; but in a democracythis is not a restriction. Indeed, in our democracies we make our freedoms secure becauseeach of us is expected to respect the rights of others and we are free to make our ownlaws. Freedom for our peoples is not only a right, but also a tool. Freedom of speech,freedom of the press, freedom of information, freedom of assembly -- these are not justabstract ideals to us; they are tools with which we create a way of life, a way of life inwhich we can enjoy freedom. Sometimes the processes of democracy are slow, and I have known someof our leaders to say that a benevolent dictatorship would accomplish the ends desired ina much shorter time than it takes to go through the democratic processes of discussion andthe slow formation of public opinion. But there is no way of insuring that a dictatorshipwill remain benevolent or that power once in the hands of a few will be returned to thepeople without struggle or revolution. This we have learned by experience and we acceptthe slow processes of democracy because we know that shortcuts compromise principles onwhich no compromise is possible. The final expression of the opinion of the people with us is throughfree and honest elections, with valid choices on basic issues and candidates. The secretballot is an essential to free elections but you must have a choice before you. I haveheard my husband say many times that a people need never lose their freedom if they kepttheir right to a secret ballot and if they used that secret ballot to the full. Basicdecisions of our society are made through the expressed will of the people. That is whywhen we see these liberties threatened, instead of falling apart, our nation becomesunified and our democracies come together as a unified group in spite of our variedbackgrounds and many racial strains. In the United States we have a capitalistic economy. That is becausepublic opinion favors that type of economy under the conditions in which we live. But wehave imposed certain restraints; for instance, we have antitrust laws. These are the legalevidence of the determination of the American people to maintain an economy of freecompetition and not to allow monopolies to take away the people’s freedom. Our trade-unions grow stronger because the people come to believethat this is the proper way to guarantee the rights of the workers and that the right toorganize and to bargain collectively keeps the balance between the actual producer an theinvestor of money and the manage in industry who watches over the man who works with thishands and who produces the materials which are out tangible wealth. In the United States we are old enough not to claim perfection. Werecognize that we have some problems of discrimination but we find steady progress beingmade in the solution of these problems. Through normal democratic processes we are comingto understand our needs and how we can attain full equality for all our people. Freediscussion on the subject is permitted. Our Supreme Court has recently rendered decisionsto clarify a number of our laws to guarantee the rights of all. The U.S.S.R. claims it has reached a point where all races withinher borders are officially considered equal and have equal rights and they insist thatthey have no discrimination where minorities are concerned. This is a laudable objective but there are other aspects of thedevelopment of freedom for the individual which are essential before the mere absence ofdiscrimination is worth much, and these are lacking in the Soviet Union. Unless they arebeing denied freedoms which they want and which they see other people have, people do notusually complain of discrimination. It is these other freedoms -- the basic freedoms ofspeech, of the press, of religion and conscience, of assembly, of fair trial and freedomfrom arbitrary arrest and punishment, which a totalitarian government cannot safely giveits people and which give meaning to freedom from discrimination. It is my belief, and I am sure it is also yours, that the strugglefor democracy and freedom is a critical struggle, for their preservation is essential tothe great objective of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security.Among free men the end cannot justify the means. We know the patterns of totalitarianism-- the single political party, the control of schools, press, radio, the arts, thesciences, and the church to support autocratic authority; these are the age-old patternsagainst which men have struggled for three thousand years. These are the signs ofreaction, retreat, and retrogression. The United Nations must hold fast to the heritage offreedom won by the struggle of its people; it must help us to pass it on to generations tocome. The development of the ideal of freedom and its translation into theeveryday life of the people in great areas of the earth is the product of the efforts ofmany peoples. It is the fruit of a long tradition of vigorous thinking and courageousaction. No one race and on one people can claim to have done all the work to achievegreater dignity for human beings and great freedom to develop human personality. In eachgeneration and in each country there must be a continuation of the struggle and new stepsforward must be taken since this is preeminently a field in which to stand still is toretreat. The field of human rights is not one in which compromise onfundamental principles are possible. The work of the Commission on Human Rights isillustrative. The Declaration of Human Rights provides: “Everyone has the right toleave any country, including his own.” The Soviet Representative said he would agreeto this right if a single phrase was added to it -- ”in accordance with the procedurelaid down in the laws of that country.” It is obvious that to accept this would benot only to compromise but to nullify the right stated. This case forcefully illustratesthe importance of the proposition that we must ever be alert not to compromise fundamentalhuman rights merely for the sake of reaching unanimity and thus lose them. As I see it, it is not going to be easy to attain unanimity withrespect to our different concepts of government and human rights. The struggle is bound tobe difficult and one in which we must be firm but patient. If we adhere faithfully to ourprinciples I think it is possible for us to maintain freedom and to do so peacefully andwithout recourse to force. The future must see the broadening of human rights throughout theworld. People who have glimpsed freedom will never be content until they have secured itfor themselves. In a truest sense, human rights are a fundamental object of law andgovernment in a just society. Human rights exist to the degree that they are respected bypeople in relations with each other and by governments in relations with their citizens. The world at large is aware of the tragic consequences for humanbeings ruled by totalitarian systems. If we examine Hitler’s rise to power, we seehow the chains are forged which keep the individual a slave and we cans e manysimilarities in the way things are accomplished in other countries. Politically men mustbe free to discuss and to arrive at as many facts as possible and there must beat least atwo-party system in a country because when there is only one political party, too manythings can be subordinated to the interests of that one party and it becomes a tyrant andnot an instrument of democratic government. The propaganda we have witnessed in the recent past, like that weperceive in these days, seeks to impugn, to undermine, and to destroy the liberty andindependence of peoples. Such propaganda poses to all peoples the issue whether to doubttheir heritage of rights and therefore to compromise the principles by which they live, ortry to accept the challenge, redouble their vigilance, and stand steadfast in the struggleto maintain and enlarge human freedoms. People who continue to be denied the respect to which they areentitled as human beings will not acquiesce forever in such denial. The Charter of the United Nations is a guiding beacon along the wayto the achievement of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the world. Theimmediate test is not only to the extent to which human rights and freedoms have alreadybeen achieved, but the direction in which the world is moving. Is there a faithfulcompliance with the objectives of the Charter if some countries continue to curtail humanrights and freedoms instead of to promote the universal respect for an observance of humanrights and freedoms for all as called for by the Charter? The place to discuss the issue of human rights is in the forum ofthe United Nations. The United Nations has been set up as the common meeting ground fornations, where we can consider together our mutual problems and take advantage of ourdifferences in experience. It is inherent in our firm attachment to democracy and freedomthat we stand always ready to use the fundamental democratic procedures of honestdiscussion and negotiation. It is now as always our hope that despite the wide differencesin approach we face in the world today, we can with mutual good faith in the principles ofthe united Nations Charter, arrive at a common basis of understanding. We are here to join the meetings of this great internationalAssembly which meets in your beautiful capital of Paris. Freedom for the individual is aninseparable part of the cherished traditions of France. As one of the Delegates from theUnited States, I pray Almighty God that we may win another victory here for the rights andfreedoms of all men.  
