 Elizabeth Gurley Flynn -- Statement at the Smith Act Trial
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn
delivered April 24 1952, New York
Your Honor, ladies and gentlemen, myname is Elizabeth Gurley Flynn.  I am a defendant in this case, acting as my ownattorney, and therefore have the opportunity to address you directly.  It is unusualfor a defendant to represent one’s self, but my comrade, Mr. Pettis Perry and I haveelected to do so.  Neither of us is a lawyer.  We will speak to you in thelanguage of laymen and women, I should say. We are both Communist leaders, proudly and avowedly.  We arequalified to explain to you what the Communist Party of the U.S.A. really stands for, whatit advocates, what its day-by-day activities are, and what are its ultimate aims.  Wewill try to do so in simple, non-technical language.  We will prove to you that weare not a criminal conspiracy but a 33-year-old working class political party, devoted tothe immediate needs and aspirations of the American people, to the advancement of theworkers, farmers and the Negro people, to the preservation of the democracy and culture,and to the advocacy of Socialism. Our ideas may be new and strange to you.  Probably you havenever seen or met a Communist before.  We don’t ask you to agree with us but tolisten with an open mind and not to accept as gospel truth the sensational tales ofstool-pigeons and planted agents who will be the Government’s chief, if not sole,witnesses. Centuries ago, Judas became the symbol of such infamy, a forerunnerof those who join a group of sincere and honest people, advocate its teachings, carry outits practices only to betray it. *           *           *           *           *           *           * We will prove to you that we who stand ready tomake extreme sacrifices for what we believe, are giving you a true picture of the purposesof the Communist Party. It is customary for a client to be introduced to the jury byhis or her attorney.  I am my own attorney. I must therefore, introduce myself. I am an American of Irish decent.  My father, Thomas Flynn, was born in Maine. My mother, Anne Gurley, was born in Galway, Ireland.  I was born in Concord, NewHampshire, 62 years ago.  I married in 1908, separated from my husband shortlythereafter, and have always used my own name.  My only son, Fred, died in 1940 at theage of 29 from a chest cancer.  I reside with my sister, who is a retired schoolteacher.  We have lived in New York City for the past 52 years.  My mother was askilled tailoress; my father a quarry worker who worked his way through the engineeringschool at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire.  My father, grandfather, and all myuncles were members of labor unions. *           *           *           *           *           *           * To continue, ladies and gentlemen, one of theessential issues in this case is my individual intent, the intent with which I joined theCommunist Party and have remained a member of it, and the intent with which I have triedto carry out its program. My intent has been shaped out of my earlier experiences and myreaction  to the conditions of life, especially the conditions of the worker. By showing you what my intent is and what in my life shaped theintent, I shall show you that never have I, and not now do I, intend to advocate theoverthrow of government by force and violence, nor do I intend to bring about suchoverthrow. I come from a family whose day-by-day diet included important socialissues of the day, and form this I early learned to question things as they are and toseek improvements. Thus, my mother advocated Women’s Suffrage, and my father andmother -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * -- and my father and mother discussed with theirchildren the campaigns of Debs, the Socialist candidate for President. My father read aloud to me and to my brother and sisters such booksas the Communist Manifesto and other writings of Marx and Engels, which the Governmentwill use as evidence in this trial. I was a serious child, due probably to these childishimpressions which are background to my affiliation in my extreme youth with the Socialistmovement and in my mature years with the Communist Party. Times were hard.  We were poor.  My first experience withdiscrimination was in Manchester, New Hampshire, when my father ran for city engineerabout 1895.  I heard it said he was defeated because he was Irish.  He was verybitter on this subject and told us of signs on factories when he was a boy, “No Irishneed apply.” Our parents opposed all forms of national, religious or colordiscrimination, which we will prove is identical with the position of the Communist Partytoday and form the basis of the position I take today in the Communist Party. My first knowledge of the meaning of imperialism, which will be anissue in this case, was a vivid recollection of my father’s opposition to theSpanish-American War and his insistence on the right of the Cuban and Philippine peoplesto their independence.  He joined an anti-imperialist league to protest against ourcountry embarking on the evil path of imperialism, which we will prove began at that time. The conditions in the textile towns of New Hampshire andMassachusetts contributed to my later joining the Communist Party, which, as Mr. Lanesays, concentrates on the recruiting of workers in industry: huge gray mills, likeprisons, barrack-like company boarding houses, long hours, low wages, long periods ofslack; the prosperous owner lived in the center of Adams, Massachusetts, and rode aroundin his fine carriage with its beautiful horses. I saw lard instead of butter onneighbors’ tables, children without underwear in cold New England winters, a girlscalped by an unguarded machine in a mill across the street from our school. I saw an oldman weeping as they put him in the lockup as a tramp. Then we came to live in the drab South Bronx, near the New HavenRailroad’s roundhouse, in a cold water, unheated, gas lit flat. Casualties andaccidents were high among the railroad workers.  Children were maimed as theygathered coal in the yards in bad times. My mother helped women in the neighborhoodwho could not afford a doctor when a baby came. *           *           *           *           *           *           * Yes, I was greatly troubled by all this.  Whydid good hard-working people suffer so?  Why were men who were willing, able, andanxious to work, denied jobs?  Why was there so much unemployment?  Why werethere rich people who apparently did little but enjoyed life?  I hated poverty. I saw my mother humiliated when unpaid grocery bills could not be met and the landlordstood at the door demanding his rent. *           *           *           *           *           *           * I joined a debating society in P.S. 9 in the lowerBronx.  I won a medal in a debate on the subject, “Should the Government own themines?”  I said, “Yes, it should.” This was during the great anthracite coal strike in 1902.  Iattended Bronx Socialist meeting in 1905; later at the Harlem Socialist Club at 125thStreet.  My speaking career started in 1906 on the ambitious subject of women undersocialism. Naturally, I drew heavily on authors, American women, like Charlotte Petingilland Susan B. Anthony, also on a book written in 1872 by Augustus Bebel, a Socialist memberof the German Reichstag, written while he was in prison under Bismarck’santi-Socialist law.  It was first published here by the Socialist Labor Party in1904.  I am puzzled to see it on the Government’s list of documents.  Whatrelation it has to this indictment is hard to fathom, unless to advocate the fullpolitical, economic, and social emancipation of women has become a form of advocacy of theoverthrow of government by force and violence under the Government’s interpretationof the Smith Act. But if this historic and economic study, which is very much out ofdate today, is to be finely tooth-combed for sentences which torn out of context candistort its meaning, this, we will prove, can be done to any book, no matter what itspurpose, even to the Bible, Shakespeare, or Gray’s Anatomy. My youthful ambition, believe it or not, was to be a constitutionallawyer.  Instead, I became a labor organizer.  Then it was call an agitator, or,by the press, one who stirred up the people.  I was determined to do something aboutthe bad conditions under which our family and all around us suffered.  I have stuckto that purpose for 46 years.  I consider in so doing I have been a goodAmerican.  I have spent my life among the American workers all over this country,slept in their homes, eaten at their tables.  They are the majority of the people whohave the inalienable right in our view to govern the country.  We mean by workers,all who do useful work of hand or brain.  My life work began when I joined theI.W.W., Industrial Workers of the World, in 1906, a pioneer in industrial unions whichflashed like a great comet across the horizon of the American labor movement for nearlytwo decades.  I returned as an I.W.W. organizer in 1912 to New England, mybirthplace, where the I.W.W. led historical textile strikes in Lawrence, Lowell, and NewBedford, Massachusetts.  The strikes were unorganized, largely foreign-born men andwomen whose wages were cut when their hours were reduced by Massachusetts law. *           *           *           *           *           *           * In 1913 I was a leader in the Paterson, New Jerseysilk strike; in 1916, in a strike of the iron ore miners on the Mesaba range in Minnesota,where the mines are owned by the U.S. Street trust, I will attempt to prove to you that itis not the Communists who advocate and use force and violence.  I saw it used in allof these labor struggles, not by the workers but by police, company guards and Statemilitia.  I saw workers clubbed, beaten and shot down. I spoke -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * My travels as a Communist speaker have taken meall over the country.  I saw the fruits of a lawless, aggressive, brutal and ruthlesscapitalism which garnered profits for a few at the expense of the many. Our country is a rich and beautiful country, fully capable ofproducing plenty for all, educating its youth and caring for its aged. We believe it coulddo this under Socialism. I saw great forests cut down and the denuded land left withblackened stumps; miles of top soil blown and washed away, and fertile fields became likea desert. I have seen textile workers who wove beautiful woolen fabricsshivering for lack of warm clothing, and coal miners living in cold shacks in companytowns, and steel towns that were armed camps.  I saw men black-listed, driven fromtown to town, forced to change their names because they had dared to try to organize aunion. We will prove to you that it is not the Communists who haveadvocated or practiced force and violence but that it is the employing class which hasdone both throughout the history of my life in the American labor movement, like GeneralSherman Bell who said in Colorado during a miner’s strike “To Hell with habeascorpus; we’ll give them post-mortems.” We will prove to you that -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * -- We will prove to you that it is nor we who flauntthe Constitution and the Bill of Rights, but that is has always been done by the employingclass.  We will prove that we are fighting here for our constitutional and democraticrights, not to advocate force and violence, but to expose and stop its use against thepeople. We will demonstrate that in fighting for our rights, we believe weare defending the constitutional rights of all Americans. We believe we are acting as goodAmericans. Since six out of eleven of my writings in Political Affairs listedby the Government deal with what is called defense, I will prove to you that this has beena part of my life work since 1907 before there was a Communist Party. For example, I distributed thousands of copies of a famous documentin the ‘20’s called “Illegal Practices of the Department of Justice,”which is not among the Government’s exhibits of old-time documents, but which I wouldgladly offer to the jury. It was signed by twelve of the most prominent lawyers ofthat period, including Professors Frankfurter and Chafee of Harvard and Francis FisherKane, who resigned his post as United States Attorney in Philadelphia in protest againstsuch proceedings. I early engaged in struggles to win free speech on the streets andin halls. This early identification with civil liberties led to my becoming a chartermember of the American Civil liberties Union in 1917, and later the organizer of theWorkers Defense Union, a delegate body from unions and fraternal organizations whichfurnished legal defense in political and labor prosecutions. We had plenty to do during the infamous 1920 Palmer Red Raids. We defended Socialist: I defended Socialists -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * -- I worked for seven years in the unsuccessfulstruggles to save the lives of Sacco and Vanzetti. In the Government’s list ofexhibits is an article I wrote in August, 1947 entitled “Sacco and Vanzetti -- TwentyYears After,” in which I pointed out the worldwide belief in their innocence. *           *           *           *           *           *           * Now I will show how and why I left the I.W.W. andjoined the Communist Party.  This bears directly on the issue of forcible overthrowof the government that Mr. Lane spoke to you about this morning.  After carefulreflection, it became clear to me that the I.W.W. was an anarcho-syndicalistorganization.  The I.W.W. wanted to bring Socialism within Capitalism and then breakthrough the shell of Capitalism by the general strike and the seizing and possession ofindustry. Now, it was precisely this position that I rejected. I came to the conclusion that Socialism could be achieved, not byone splurge of violence, but by the persistent political activities of the workers and thepeople.  And so in order to participate in political activities in the effort toachieve Socialism, I joined the Communist Party.  In doing this, I got back into thelabor movement and stopped being what I then had decided was anarchistic. *           *           *           *           *           *           * As to the origin of the Communist Party, we willshow here that there developed within the Socialist Party an organized Left-wing movementuntil, by 1919, it was the majority of that party. At the Chicago convention of the Socialist Party a splitoccurred.  The Left wing, ejected by the police, reorganized as the CommunistParty.  The Left wing was the majority of the old Socialist Party. All of my Socialist friends and associates were Left-wingers. I was in great sympathy with them. By 1926, I had become convinced that the Communist Party was thelogical inheritor of all the best traditions, history and struggles of the older Socialistmovement and of the I.W.W., too.  I was ready to join the party and gave anapplication to Charles Ruthenberg, then the secretary of the Communist Party, in 1926. Due to his sudden death a few weeks later during the most criticalperiod of my own illness, that application was apparently lost.  Anyhow, it was neverpresented to the Party.  I was ill of heart trouble in Portland, Oregon, at thattime. While there, I was in constant touch with my old friends, Ella ReeveBloor and Anita Whitney of California, both Communist leaders. Naturally, my heart and mind, although I was ill, were deeplyinvolved in the current political problems of the people, the menace of Fascism in Europe,the great struggles of the unemployment led by Communists Foster, Amter, Minor, Dennis andothers, and later the new unions which were present during the New Deal of PresidentRoosevelt. Miss Whitney brought me a Daily Worker in the fall of 1935 with aspeech by George Dimitroff, called “The United Front Against War and Fascism,”which the Government has stated it intends offering in evidence.  This speech made adeep impression on me. We will show the character of Communist work in the struggle againstfascism in answer to this clarion call of Dimitroff, who died in 1949 as premier of hiscountry.  We will show the background of this speech, which is essential in order foryou to understand its meaning and the intent with which I then joined the Communist Party. This was the time of the rise of fascism, which we will show seemedvery remote to most people in our country in the ‘30’s. People laughed at Hitlerand Mussolini as demagogues and mountebanks, but it caused great concern to the peoples ofEurope, especially to the Communists in those countries directly affected or threatened. George Dimitroff was a Bulgarian Communist who had been in exile inGermany and while there was framed in the infamous Reichstag fire case. *           *           *           *           *           *           * Dimitroff was freed.  He took refuge in theSoviet Union, where he delivered this speech in 1935 at the Congress of the CommunistInternational.  It is an eloquent and dramatic appeal to fight fascism, which hedescribes as the most vicious enemy of mankind.  It is addressed to Communistsespecially and other progressive people elsewhere, to put aside all immediate partisan orsectarian interest or differences or ultimate political aims to unite to stopfascism.  We will prove that this is what is meant by “united front.” This policy brought Communists together with all other honest and patriotic people whowere determined to save their country from the ravages of fascism.  We will show thatHank Forbes, one of our party organizers who might otherwise be here as a defendant, losthis life at the Anzio Beachhead in pursuance of that policy, as did hundreds of AmericanCommunists in World War II. I resolved when I read this powerful appeal, “Here is where Ibelong.  As soon as I am well I will again apply to join the CommunistParty.”  I did so.  William Z. Foster, whom I first met in 1909 in theI.W.W., and Ella Reeve Bloor, whom I knew from the old Socialist Party, presented myapplication in the winter of 1936 and 1937. It was accepted and publicly announced in thepress. In my extreme youth I had affiliated myself with the nonpoliticalI.W.W.; in my maturity I came back into the working class political movement ofsocialism.  This may seem a very lengthy introduction, but I have tried to drawconclusions from my biography on the issues in this case.  I did not intend it to bepersonal, but and explanation of how and why I became a Communist.  And I am anexample, not and exception. Now, as to my official position in the Communist Party, which Igladly and proudly acknowledge -- they are a matter of public record: in 1938 I became andam today a member of the National Committee of the Communist Party.  The NationalCommittee was reduced in 1948 to 13.  The other 12 members are William Z. Foster, ourchairman, who has been seriously ill for several years, and my dear comrades, the 11Communist leaders convicted under the Smith Act, which they challenged asunconstitutional.  I have also been chairman of the Women’s Committee of theCommunist Party since 1945, which the evidence will show carries on struggle for equalrights for women in shops, unions, and all organizations, even including our own partywhen necessary. My comrade, Claudia Jones, a defendant here, is the executivesecretary.  We have worked together, spoken together, written, and helped organizewomen for full equality, both politically and economically, for the building of movementsfor peace, consumers’ councils, parent-teachers’ organizations, and similarorganizations, for the unity of Negro and white women, and to overcome the exploitation ofNegro women as workers, as women, as Negroes. Many articles which both of us have written on these subjects arefeatured in the Government’s list of exhibits.  We will demonstrate to you howconstructive and beneficial is the nature of our work among women, inspiring them togreater self-confidence, greater comradeship with one another, greater participation inpublic affairs.  The evidence will show further that we have urged the organizationof women for political activity, not only on Election Day, but the year around, inhearings, delegations, petitions and statements to all legislative and public bodies onsuch issues as child care, better schools, better housing, a better standard of living,etc. We have written of the history of the women’s movement in ourcountry, where every right we now enjoy has been won only by organized struggle -- theright of women to vote, to serve on juries, protective labor legislation for womenworkers, mothers’ pensions, and so forth. We have directed our sharpest criticism to the virtualdisfranchisement of the southern Negro women by force and violence and through the pooltax, discrimination against women in factories, lack of upbringing, etc. We have advocated socialism as a system of society best guaranteeingto women full equal rights in all spheres and insuring to them the possibility ofexercising these rights. I remind you again that we are not asking you to agree with us, butwill prove to you that we have not been advocating force and violence, but, rather, apeaceful, happy world. I have also been chairman of the defense committee of the Partysince 1948, when our leaders previously referred to were arrested.  The evidence willshow that our duties, my duties, were to raise funds necessary for adequate legal defenseof our members who might be arrested under the Smith Act or held for deportation under theMcCarran Act.  Individual Communists are not financially able to defendthemselves.  These duties are ours.  Our duties were to publicize the facts inthe case, since newspaper coverage is notoriously inadequate and invariably prejudiced, toorganized mass meetings, arrange tours for speakers, and generally call for public supportfor their defense. *           *           *           *           *           *           * In addition, the Government’s list ofdocuments which they told us they would introduce in this case or indicated they wouldintroduce in this case, makes clear to you, will make clear to you, that I am a columnistof the Daily Worker.  This is correct.  For 15 years, form 1937 to date, I haveproduced at least two columns a week, besides many feature articles for the Sundaypaper.  The Worker.  These are my personal columns and are not submitted to theeditorial staff in advance.  Praise or criticism comes from the readers.  Someof my columns and articles are listed by the Government as Government’s exhibits,which they intend to introduce. If they are to prove my official position in our Party ormy tours around the country or that I spoke in any specific places or that I invitedpeople to join the Communist Party, the Government need not waste its time.  I do notdeny any of these things.  The evidence will show that I asked people to joinit.  I believe in the Party to which I belong.  It is a legal Party in myestimation devoted to the best interest of the people, and I would not belong to it if Iwould hesitate to ask any honest persons to join me.  Hundreds did so at myinvitation.  I would be glad to make available to the jury at the appropriate timenot just a few articles carefully culled for the Government’s purposes, but all ofthem dealing with a vast range of subjects. I will prove to you thereby that there is no advocacy of force andviolence in any one of them. *           *           *           *           *           *           * I have also written a dozen pamphlets during thepast period covered by the indictment. *           *           *           *           *           *           * One is called Stool Pigeon.  Another The Plot to Gag America. The Government did not list them for your attention.  Irecommend especially that you do read one of their listed documents if and when it ispresented -- the eloquent and able opening remarks of Eugene Dennis, General Secretary ofthe Communist Party, when he stood here, as I am standing now, defending himself beforeanother jury.  I wrote an introduction to it.  It is called The Case for theCommunist Party.  The Government has indicated that it intends offering it inevidence, possibly for this reason.  I am glad that the Government will make itavailable to you and would be happy to follow congressional example and ask that thisspeech of Eugene Dennis be considered an extension of my remarks. *           *           *           *           *           *           * I have handbills, advertisements and pressclipping relative to hundreds of public mass meetings arranged by the Communist Party atwhich I and other defendants have spoken in the past 15 years.  We will prove thatnowhere has there been any advocacy of force and violence.  The subject matter ofsuch meetings should interest this jury, I believe, however, as evidence of our intent. Take some at random:  "The Struggle Against the Taft-Hartley Law" -- "The Rights of the Negro People" -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * I and other defendants have spokenduring the period covered by the indictment and previously on the radio, especially inpolitical campaigns in support of Communist and other candidates, including Councilmen Cacchione and Davis, and for Simon W. Gerson, a defendant present here, when he was acandidate after Mr. Cacchione’s sudden death. We will prove to you that the Communist Party, U.S.A.,is not, as the indictment sets forth, a society, group or assembly of persons but is alegitimate political party.  It has nominated candidates for all public offices,including that of President. We will prove that defendants here on trial have beencandidates and won substantially high votes -- Perry, Gerson, Begun, Johnson, Weinstone andWeinstock. I ran with Mr. Benjamin J. Davis for Congress-at-largein 1942 and we each received over 50,000 votes. Our campaign slogan or program for victory was: “Not an idle man. Not an idle machine. Not an idle acre.” Mr. Gerson received 150,000 votes in Brooklyn in 1948. One of the defendants in the current Los Angeles Smith Act trial, aknown Communist, Miss Bernadette Doyle, received over 600,000 votes for a state-wideoffice as a peace candidate. Our evidence will prove how the Communist Party operatespolitically.  We are a party of a new type in that we are not before the people justto capture their votes.  We will prove that we are politically active the year round.We have attended public hearings as Communist spokesmen: for instance, I appeared with Mr.Gerson before the Senate Judiciary Committee to oppose the appointment of Tom Clarke tothe Supreme Court. If our Party along with other minority parties were not hampered byever-increasing electoral restrictions and barred from the ballot in some states, webelieve firmly we would win many more votes and elect candidates to Congress. Communists are represented in the Parliaments of all majornon-fascist countries in the world today. This is the arena where political views belong, in the marketplaceof public discussion, to be passed upon solely by the electorate of our country. The Government obviously intends to make much of the fact thatoccasionally we spoke in somebody’s home to a selected group of people.  Inreference to such house gatherings -- and some were purely social -- we will show that theseare some of the reasons: Sometimes it was because no hall could be rented and in smallone-industry towns, like steel, coal and textiles, people seen at a Communist meeting bycompany spies would lose their jobs and be black-listed, and even the unions would not beable to protect these members. Sometimes we held them in homes for the convenience of women whocould not attend otherwise.  Sometimes it was for the protection of Negro people,especially in the South and border state areas, that the speaker goes to them rather thanexpecting them to come to the speaker.  We will show that we consider it our duty asCommunists to protect workers, members and non-members alike, from harassment, loss ofjobs, threats of violence or FBI surveillance, and just because they come to ourmeetings.  Wherever possible our meetings were open with the public and the pressinvited.  Sometimes, unfortunately, Communists are driven to privacy as protectionagainst persecution. Criticism should not be directed to us but at those who create therepressive conditions which, we will prove, forces workers to choose between their jobsand their beliefs.  We will prove, and I can assure you, that no member of our partybut what would be happy and willing to publicly declare his or her membership if the samerights and protection were accorded to us as to all others engaged in political activityin our country. The Government will also make much of schools, as Mr. Lane hasalready indicated, where Marxism-Leninism was taught. I gave lectures at certain schools in New York City, Pittsburgh,Philadelphia, Cleveland and at a national training school.  My topics were either“History of the Labor Movement” or “History of the Women’s Movement inthe U.S.A.”  I have the outlines which I used in these courses which areanalytical and explanatory, and I will, because they are only brief -- I will offer them inevidence in this case. A course on the “History of the American Labor Movement,”delivered at the Jefferson School of New York, is presented here as the overt act of Mr.Louis Weinstock. This brings us to the skeleton upon which this case is built -- astrange new type of overt act, suggestive, if I may say so, of Nazi book-burning. They set forth -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * They set forth, we believe, activities which arethe ordinary everyday acts of all organizations and individuals who seek to present theirviews in the marketplace of ideas. Of 29 overt acts, 11 are articles in the magazine Political Affairs. 5 are Daily Worker articles. 5, including mine, are public meetings. 2 are committee meetings. 2 are classes. One is leaving a building. One is mailing letters. One is writing a pamphlet. One is becoming a party organizer. The Government will attempt to clothe them, too.  I presume, inthe so-called Aesopian language, or, no matter what we said, we really meant its opposite.It is quite a Houdini-like performance to say peace to a mass meeting of 10,000 people andmean war. Mr. Perry and I and our co-defendants will try, in the evidence wesubmit as this case progresses, to cut through the maze of what we considermisrepresentations in relation to Aesopian language, and to make it clear that what -- thatwe say what we mean and we mean what we say, and that the language of Marxism-Leninism isnot as mysterious or obscure as the Government attempts to make it sound. All sciences, even the law, have their own terminology, but like adoctor’s prescription, this does not mean they are dishonest or misleading to thegeneral public.  Not a single act of violence is alleged against any one of us. Not are there charges that I know of thus far that any of us collectively or individuallyadvocated the forceful overthrow of the United States Government. This science of Marxism-Leninism, which is expounded in the books asevidence had its origin over a century ago with two great political thinkers, Karl Marxand Frederick Engels.  In a few words -- and there is always a danger ofover -- simplification of a scientific subject, they declared that what happens to humanityis not a matter of blind fate nor the will of great men, nor must it be accepted asirrevocable.  They said mankind can find a scientific explanation for wars, famine,economic depression and poverty, and that mankind, especially the working class, can helpto change society, can alter and direct the course of history, can abolish these evils andinstitute a planned social order, based on the well-being of all. Out of their profoundanalysis of all human history, and especially of its present stage known as capitalism,they developed the system of scientific socialism which you will hear clarified by ourwitnesses. Today it has become a tremendous subject, too vast for any oneperson to fully explain, nor would the time allowed for a trial permit it.  TheGovernment, I believe, will try to do the impossible, to compress over a century of thedevelopment of a great social science into the use of a few books and an infinitesimalpart of its application. These scientific theories were not fixed and final at the death ofMarx and Engels who never considered them a dogma.  Like all sciences, they haveexpanded and have been modified by subsequent developments. Other students and writers took up where they left off, particularlyV. I. Lenin, a giant intellect and a great man who suffered exile and imprisonment underthe Russian Czar. He returned to his beloved country to lead the workers and peasantsto free themselves form Czarist tyranny and exploitation. Lenin enriched Marxism by hisstudies, especially his analyses of new social conditions brought about by the rise ofimperialism and the advent of socialism. Marxist-Leninist writings today fill thousands of books in all knownlanguages and would more than fill this courtroom from floor to ceiling.  They arestudied by millions of people throughout the world, but we will prove to you that thesegreat beacon lights are not blueprints, are not hard-and-fast directives but are only aguide, modified to conform to the developments of history and to new socialconditions.  Programs, immediate programs are their application. We hold that political theories are not triable in a court of lawunder our established American tradition.  No jury’s verdict can decide theirmerit; only the people can do that. We have believed that under the Bill of Rights wehave a right to advocate our views, but since our ideas are here on trial we feel we havea sacred duty to ourselves and to our Party to adequately defend them from any slander ordistortion. We contend that Americans have a right to speak their minds out onany subject. We Communists have a right to defend socialism or the evolution of thecapitalist system and economy and of the private ownership of the means of life of all thepeople. We will prove that such a change can and will be achieved, only whenthe majority of the American people are ready and willing to make it, and that theCommunist Party does not advocate force and violence to effect such a change. We will try to prove to you during this trial the meaning of workingclass internationalism, which the Government will use to bolster up their theory offoreign agent. Abraham Lincoln said:  “The strongest bond of humansympathy, outside the family relation, should be one uniting all working people of allnations and tongues, and kindred.” Both May Day and International Women’s Day,we will prove, had their origin here in the United States even though they are nowcelebrated internationally. In the spirit of such solidarity I will show that I made three tripsabroad and which, except for visits to Canada, were my first outside the U.S.A.  Theoccasions were a Congress of Women, held in 1945; the 80th birthday of Marcel Cachin,editor of the Communist daily paper of Paris, L’Humanite, in 1949: and to cover theconvention of the French Communist Party in 1950, where I was received as a fraternaldelegate from our American party and invited to deliver its greetings. On this last trip I visited London over a weekend, spoke at a LondonDistrict Communist Party conference, and visited the grave of Karl Marx. You will undoubtedly hear evidence form the Government of my firsttrip to Europe. The International Congress of Women was held in 1945, before the ashes ofwar were cold. Women participated from all the Allied countries:  The Soviet Union,England, France, Italy, Hungary and others. Many had just been released form concentration camps andprisons:  Ravensbrouck, Buchenwald, Auschwitz.  We met women there who had beenin the Soviet Army air force, who had been in charge of railroads, were executives ofindustry and reconstruction; women who came from a socialist country. We met Spanish womenin exile, some who came out of Spain at the risk of their lives. This Congress held in Paris, without heat, with flickering lights,with sparse food supplies, was dedicated to the establishment of permanent peace in theworld, the welfare of children, to the rights of women, all so ruthlessly destroyed by theNazis.  “Never to let it happen again” was their burning resolve. Our American delegation was amazed that they were so fearful thatfascism, like the fabled Phoenix, would arise again from its own ashes. On our home voyagevia an Army transport carrying over 5,000 returning G.I.’s, we found their desire forpeace as eager as that of the European women. We will prove here that our work on behalfof peace is identical with the hopes and dreams of men and women all over the world aswell as the whole American people today. I wrote a series of 28 articles on these trips.  The one theGovernment has listed is “I Met A Great Leader of France,” published February 3,1946, in The Worker and referring to a member and vice-president of the French Assembly, aleader of the French resistance movement against the Nazis, a French Communist leader,Jacques Duclos.  You have heard his name from Mr. Lane.  You will hear a greatdeal about this French Communist who had written an article in a French Communistsmagazine Cahiers Du Communisme, in April, 1945.  It was addressed to his Frenchcomrades. We will prove that they had reconstructed their party officially on itsemergence from underground and were determined not to lose its identity in the popularUnited Front which had developed in the days of the resistance.  While cooperating tothe fullest for the reestablishment of the French Republic, they maintained theirindependent existence as the Communist Party of France.  We will prove that he usedas an example of the wrong way to work, the dissolution of the American Communist Partyand the creation of the Communist Political Association, which he analyzed in detail forthe clarification of his French readers to counteract “certain suggestions forliquidation,” which had been circulated there in France.  But we will prove thathis article, while it was a sharp criticism of the American party, was not a directive noran order.  It stands to reason that such a characterization of our course asnotorious revisionism which came from an heroic fighter against Nazism, and a Communist ofworld renown, caused us to give it our most serious attention; especially was this so, andwe will prove, when it coincided with alarming developments within our own country whichconvinced us that the capitalist leopard had not changed its spots during the war, but wasready to resume class hostilities against American labor unions and our Party. We will prove to you that a revaluation of our thinking and actionshad already begun in our party leadership, and even without the Duclon article, althoughpossibly not quite so swiftly, we would have reconstituted our Party, which had existedsince 1919, interrupted only by an extremely short period of the few months of theCommunist Political Association. We feel that we have a right to call upon the Government to explainin the course of their accusations why, if the alleged danger emanating from our work wasso clear and present that the Smith Act was needed in 1940, why wasn’t it usedagainst our leadership until 1948, or against us, the present defendants, until elevenyears after the passage?  We will prove that Socialism was not on the agenda of the1940 American political campaign, nor in 1944, nor 1948, or even now in 1952, and,therefore, cannot be the real causative factor for this indictment. We have publicly advocated Socialism as our ultimate goal since thebirth of our Party 33 years ago, please remember. Nor is the charge of force and violence a newly discoveredissue.  It was fought out tenaciously by the Government for 16 years in the famousSchneiderman case, which began in 1927, and which they lost before the Supreme Court in1943 -- *           *           *           *           *           *           * -- three years after the Smith Act was passed. It was an attempt to cancel the citizenship of a leading Communist. If our Party needed reassurance of its legal rights, we felt it wascertainly given by this decision.  Justice Murphy wrote the opinion.  I willquote to you a portion of it, which to out Party and to the country generally wasunderstood to have laid low this false accusation of force and violence once and for all,and to have reaffirmed our right to advocate our political views. This also casts light onour intent, which you must consider.  The Supreme Court had before them four of thebooks produced here -- the quote is as follows: A tenable conclusion from the foregoing is that the Party in1927 desired to achieve its purpose by peaceful and democratic means, and as a theoreticalmatter justified the use of force and violence only as a method of preventing an attemptedforcible counter-overthrow once the Party had obtained control in a peaceful manner, or asa method of last resort to enforce the majority will if at some indefinite future timebecause of peculiar circumstances constitutional or peaceful channels were no longeropen. That is the close of Justice Murphy’s quote.  We willprove that our Party has repeatedly endorsed this statement as a basically correct, thoughincomplete, statement of our Party’s policy in the matter of force and violence, andWilliam Z. Foster, our chairman, so stated a few years ago before the Senate JudiciaryCommittee. It is our contention that neither of these issues, neither Socialismnor the charge of force and violence, should rightfully bring us before this jury on thisindictment.  They becloud the real issues which we believe are to be found primarilyin our day-to-day activities which are not peripheral or fringe activities as theGovernment contends, but the heart of our work.  To fight against fascist tendenciesin our country and to fight for peace is to us Marxism and Leninism in action. We believe that the struggle for peace and democratic rights willvery soon lead to a new political alignment in our country, which we believe will breakthrough the pattern of the two-party system and establish a new people’s party, acoalition which we would support. We will prove that what is called capitalism has existed only acomparatively short time in the United States, less than two centuries, and it is notidentical with government.  It is neither the first nor the last stage of humansociety.  Only those who profit by it consider it the Alpha and Omega, the best ofall possible conclusions. Before capitalism there was feudalism, when the feudal lords ownedthe land and lived on the labor of their serf. Before that there were chattel slavery, barbarism. Capitalism developed and supplanted feudalism.  With the adventof power-operated mass production machinery, it expanded rapidly, controlled by anever-smaller group as free competition was replaced by monopoly. When we speak of abolishing capitalism, we do not mean of course toabolish the rich natural resources of our country, nor the vast productive industrieswhich have been developed by the labor of its people.  We will prove that we meanabolishing the private ownership of the basic means of production and the profit-makingsystem it engenders, which permits a few, the capitalistic class, to exploit the many. We mean that the natural resources, and the mines, mills, factories,railroads, means of communication, shall be owned in common by all the people as stateproperty to be administered by a government representing the working class, as well as allother people. We don’t mean that personal or private property is abolished inthose things which are the result of saving or for personal use. What will be abolished isthe use of private property to exploit the labor of another.  For example, in asocialistic society the principle applied would be from each according to his ability toeach according to this work, which is identical with what St. Paul said to theThessalonians, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. In a Communist society, as differentiated from a socialisticsociety, when an abundance of everything needed for human life, development and comfort isassured, the principle would then be from each according to his ability, to each accordingto his needs. This will be Communism, the fulfillment, we believe, of an idealhuman society, which we believe to be possible and desirable. In answer as to how we expect socialism will be brought about, incontradiction to the theory of force and violence, we will prove, as I have said, itcannot be the result of our efforts alone but it can be the result of the action of themajority of the people of the United States when they are ready and willing to make such achange. We will show that we sincerely denounce in our constitution“any group or party which conspires or acts to subvert, undermine, weaken oroverthrow any or all institutions of American democracy through which the majority of theAmerican people can maintain their rights to determine their destinies.” In relation to a future hypothetical situation in the United Stateswhere an entrenched capitalist minority might use force to thwart the will of the peoplewho voted for and are ready to make the transition to socialism, this would be tyranny,and we would take the position that the people would be justified to use force tooverthrow it, just like our own Government called upon the people of Nazi Germany andfascist Italy to overthrow the rule of terror against the people and aid the undergroundresistance movement in all fascist-occupied countries. The Communist position is thatthose who favored slavocracy opposed the abolition of human slavery in the past; it isquite possible that a diehard capitalist minority might oppose the abolition of thecapitalist profit system in the future. Here, as in England and elsewhere, weCommunist strive for a peaceful road to Socialism. We will show that we would doeverything in our power to prevent the use of force and violence in establishingSocialism, which we know full well cannot be undertaken here or elsewhere unless it hasthe support of the majority of the people.  But we cannot, of course, guarantee thatthe enemies of the people will accept the decision of the people to move to Socialism.Socialism, however, is not yet on the order of the day, let me repeat, in the UnitedStates.  The immediate political program of our Party, we will prove, is anti-war andanti-fascist, for a people’s front government, a government dedicated to assure thewell-being of the people.  What will take place after that along the road toSocialism in the United States of America is something history and the American peoplewill determine, but which no one can here blueprint.  This brings me now to myconcluding remarks. We are here before you as defendants in the Smith Act case.  Wewill prove to you that we are not conspirators, but that we are animated and united bycommon ideals and aspirations, with courage to affirm our beliefs, faith in the people andthe future, and a willingness to sacrifice for a better world, which we are confident isin birth.  Nevertheless, it is incumbent on the Government, regardless of ourideological unity, to deal with us as individuals, and not to lump us together as aconspiracy because of the identity of our political views.  We will try to bring youa true and accurate picture of who we are, what our lives have been, what we say and mean,what we live by day by day and the relation of all this immediate activity to our ultimateaims. We will try to present to you during this trial our theories and work, ourprogram, and our ultimate goal, the unity of theory and practice as it says in thebooks.  We will not do this in a classroom atmosphere, but so that you can understandus, in terms of our own knowledge and experience, regardless of whether you agree withus.  We expect to convince you that we are within our established constitutionalrights to advocate change and progress, to advocate Socialism, which we are convinced willguarantee to all our people in our great and beautiful country the rights of life,liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.  Whether we are right is no issue here, and nojury, in this or any other trial, but time alone, will decide.  Let none of usforget, especially in this trial in dealing with new ideas and proposals for socialchange, the wise words of Abraham Lincoln: “This country with its institutions belongs to the people whoinhabit it.” We are asking you to decide this case on the evidence, or, morecorrectly, may I say, on the lack of evidence which we are confident will be glaringlyrevealed long before this trial is over, to decide this case on the exact issues,regardless of fear or favor or the hysteria or prejudice which we all know very well doesexist among some groups in the community.  We ask you to keep your minds open untilall the evidence, including our own, is before you.  Then you will be shown that wedo not advocate the overthrow of the Government of the United States by force andviolence.  
