 Shirley Chisholm - For the Equal Rights Amendment (Aug 10, 1970)
Shirley Anita St. Hill Chisholm
delivered 10 Aug 1970, Washington, DC.
Mr. Speaker, House Joint Resolution 264, before us today, whichprovides for equality under the law for both men and women, represents one of the mostclear-cut opportunities we are likely to have to declare our faith in the principles thatshaped our Constitution. It provides a legal basis for attack on the most subtle, mostpervasive, and most institutionalized form of prejudice that exists.  Discriminationagainst women, solely on the basis of their sex, is so widespread that is seems to manypersons normal, natural and right. Legal expression of prejudice on the grounds of religious orpolitical belief has become a minor problem in our society. Prejudice on the basis of raceis, at least, under systematic attack. There is reason for optimism that it will start todie with the present, older generation. It is time we act to assure full equality ofopportunity to those citizens who, although in a majority, suffer the restrictions thatare commonly imposed on minorities, to women. The argument that this amendment will not solve the problem of sexdiscrimination is not relevant. If the argument were used against a civil rights bill -- asit has been used in the past -- the prejudice that lies behind it would be embarrassing. Ofcourse laws will not eliminate prejudice from the hearts of human beings. But that is noreason to allow prejudice to continue to be enshrined in our laws -- to perpetuateinjustice through inaction. The amendment is necessary to clarify countless ambiguities andinconsistencies in our legal system. For instance, the Constitution guarantees due processof law, in the 5th and 14th amendments. But the applicability of due process of sexdistinctions is not clear: Women are excluded from some State colleges and universities.In some States, restrictions are placed on a married woman who engages in an independentbusiness. Women may not be chosen for some juries. Women even receive heavier criminalpenalties than men who commit the same crime. What would the legal effects of the equalrights amendment really be? The equal rights amendment would govern only the relationshipbetween the State and its citizens -- not relationships between private citizens. Theamendment would be largely self-executing, that is, and Federal or State laws in conflictwould be ineffective one year after date of ratification without further action by theCongress or State legislatures. Opponents of the amendment claim its ratification would throw thelaw into a state of confusion and would result in much litigation to establish itsmeaning. This objection overlooks the influence of legislative history in determiningintent and the recent activities of many groups preparing for legislative changes in thisdirection. State labor laws applying only to women, such as those limitinghours of work and weights to be lifted would become inoperative unless the legislatureamended them to apply to men. As of early 1970, most States would have some laws that would be affected. However, changes are being made so rapidly as a result of Title VII ofthe Civil Rights Act of 1964, it is likely that by the time the Equal Rights Amendmentwould become effective, no conflicting State laws would remain. In any event, there has for years been great controversy as to theusefulness to women of these State labor laws. There has never been any doubt that theyworked a hardship on women who need or want to work overtime and on women who need or wantbetter paying jobs; and there has been no persuasive evidence as to how many women benefitfrom the archaic policy of the laws. After the Delaware hours law was repealed in 1966,there were no complaints from women to any of the State agencies that might have beenapproached. Jury service laws not making women equally liable for jury servicewould have been revised. The selective service law would have to include women, but womenwould not be required to serve in the Armed Forces where they are not fitted any more thanmen are required to serve. Military service, while a great responsibility, is not withoutbenefits, particularly for young men with limited education or training. Since October 1966, 246,000 young men who did not meet the normalmental or physical requirements have been given opportunities for training and correctingphysical problems. This opportunity is not open to their sisters. Only girls who havecompleted high school and meet high standards on the educational test can volunteer.Ratification of the amendment would not permit application of higher standards to women. Survivorship benefits would be available to husbands of femaleworkers on the same basis as to wives of male workers. The Social Security Act and thecivil service and military service retirement acts are in conflict. Public schools anduniversities could not be limited to one sex and could not apply different admissionstandards to men and women. Laws requiring longer prison sentences for women than menwould be invalid, and equal opportunities for rehabilitation and vocational training wouldhave to be provided in public correctional institutions. Different ages of majority basedon sex would have to be harmonized. Federal, State, and other governmental bodies would beobligated to follow nondiscriminatory practices in all aspects of employment, includingpublic school teachers and State university and college faculties. What would be the economic effects of the Equal Rights Amendment? Directeconomic effects would be minor. If any labor laws applying only to women still remained,their amendment or repeal would provide opportunity for women in better-paying jobs inmanufacturing. More opportunities in public vocational and graduate schools for womenwould also tend to open up opportunities in better jobs for women. Indirect effects could be much greater. The focusing of publicattention on the gross legal, economic, and social discrimination against women byhearings and debates in the Federal and State legislatures would result in changes inattitude of parents, educators, and employers that would bring about substantial economicchanges in the long run. Sex prejudice cuts both ways. Men are oppressed by the requirementsof the Selective Service Act, by enforced legal guardianship of minors, and by alimonylaws. Each sex, I believe, should be liable when necessary to serve and defend thiscountry. Each has a responsibility for the support of children. There are objections raised to wiping out laws protecting womenworkers. No one would condone exploitation. But what does sex have to do with it. Workingconditions and hours that are harmful to women are harmful to men; wages that are unfairfor women are unfair for men. Laws setting employment limitations on the basis of sex areirrational, and the proof of this is their inconsistency from State to State. The physicalcharacteristics of men and women are not fixed, but cover two wide spans that have a greatdeal of overlap. It is obvious, I think, that a robust woman could be more fit forphysical labor than a weak man. The choice of occupation would be determined by individualcapabilities, and the rewards for equal works should be equal. This is what it comes down to: artificial distinctions betweenpersons must be wiped out of the law. Legal discrimination between the sexes is, in almostevery instance, founded on outmoded views of society and the pre-scientific beliefs aboutpsychology and physiology. It is time to sweep away these relics of the past and setfuture generations free of them. Federal agencies and institutions responsible for the enforcement ofequal opportunity laws need the authority of a Constitutional amendment. The 1964 CivilRights Act and the 1963 Equal Pay Act are not enough; they are limited in theircoverage -- for instance, one excludes teachers, and the other leaves out administrative andprofessional women. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has not proven to be anadequate device, with its power limited to investigation, conciliation, and recommendationto the Justice Department. In its cases involving sexual discrimination, it has failed inmore than one-half. The Justice Department has been even less effective. It hasintervened in only one case involving discrimination on the basis of sex, and this was ona procedural point. In a second case, in which both sexual and racial discrimination werealleged, the racial bias charge was given far greater weight. Evidence of discrimination on the basis of sex should hardly have tobe cited here. It is in the Labor Department’s employment and salary figures foranyone who is still in doubt. Its elimination will involve so many changes in our Stateand Federal laws that, without the authority and impetus of this proposed amendment, itwill perhaps take another 194 years. We cannot be parties to continuing a delay. The timeis clearly now to put this House on record for the fullest expression of that equality ofopportunity which our Founding Fathers professed. They professed it, but they did notassure it to their daughters, as they tried to do for their sons. The Constitution they wrote was designed to protect the rights ofwhite, male citizens. As there were no black Founding Fathers, there were no foundingmothers -- a great pity, on both counts. It is not too late to complete the work theyleft undone. Today, here, we should start to do so. In closing, I would like to make one point: Social and psychologicaleffects will be initially more important than legal or economic results. As Leo Kanowitzhas pointed out: Rules of law that treat of the sexes per se [inevitably] produce far-reaching effects upon social, psychological and economic aspectsof male-female relations beyond the limited confines of legislative chambers andcourtrooms. As long as organized legal systems, at once the most respected and mostfeared of social institutions, continue to differentiate sharply, in treatment or inwords, between men and women on the basis of irrelevant and artificially createddistinctions, the likelihood of men and women coming to regard one another primarily asfellow human beings and only secondarily as representatives of another sex will continueto be remote. When men and women are prevented from recognizing oneanother’s essential humanity by sexual prejudices, nourished by legal as well as socialinstitutions, society as a whole remains less than it could otherwise become.  
